pages/mdx/biology-lab-work.mdx, before:

---
name: Biology - Lab Work
description: TBD
slug: /biology/lab-work
---

import { navigate } from "gatsby";

## Lab Work

In this section, you will find notes from our lab work, which took place over the summer in 2023.

### Monday 17th July 2023

Today we delivered the equipment to the lab and started the briefing with Dr Markiv at 10am. This included safety briefing about disposal, gloves and coats, as well as some core skills such as pipetting. We found that in ordering the E. coli, they were not competent cells, as we had planned to use, so we would have to accommodate the new protocols to prepare the E. coli for transformations.

During the day, we prepared the solutions needed to create competent bacteria from ours. This included:

20g/L LB broth x2; 500ml water flask  
0.1 M CaCl2 solution (7.35 g of CaCl2·2H2O in 500 ml of H2O) in 500 ml Pyrex bottle.  
0.1 M MgCl2 solution (10.165 g of MgCl2 ·6H2O in 500ml of H2O) in 500ml Pyrex bottle.  
50% glycerol solution (100 ml of glycerol and 100 ml H2O) in 200 ml Pyrex bottle.  
(All these solutions would then be autoclaved and stored at 4°C.)

We also produced stock solutions for our agar plates using:

LB agar 2x 400ml in 500ml Pyrex bottle; 20g/L LB broth (8g) + 2% weight per volume agar (8g) in 400ml water.  
20g/L LB broth, making 200ml  
Ampicillin 100 mg/ml – 1 g in 10 ml of MilliQ water.  
(These were closed with sponge and foil, labelled and autoclaved at 125°C for15 minutes and stored at room temperature.)

The stock solution is filtered through a 0.2 mm filter, aliquoted into 10 tips (1μ/ml each) and stored at -20oC until use. The final working concentration of all antibiotics is 1:1000 of the stock solution (1000x ampicillin).

Our E. coli cells were also inoculated and left overnight on agar plates to grow in preparation for making them competent. This was done during the week, and we resumed work on Thursday.

### Thursday 20th July 2023

We found that the DNA that we ordered was linear and did not have four random nucleotides on its ends. As a result, the restriction sites were too close to the end which made it difficult for restriction enzymes to “break” the restriction sites. This meant that we would have to use primers to add onto the ends of our sequences and turn our linear DNA into plasmids using a plasmid backbone.

Today, we used a mass spectrometer to measure the growth of our E. Coli, based on its optical density in respect to the density of the media alone (the LB Broth). The spectrometer detects absorbance 600 Nanometres.  
The first measurement was 0.3, so we let the bacteria grow in a shaking incubator for 20 mins
This resulted in the second measurement being 0.585, which is within our working range (0.4-0.6).

Having obtained a good amount of bacteria, we left them on ice for 30 minutes before centrifuging them in the solutions we has prepared on Monday, turning them into competent bacteria. You can find the process for this in our <b><a href="#" onClick={() => navigate("/biology/protocols/")}>Protocols</a></b> section.  
Once prepared, 50μl of the cells were aliquoted into 1.5ml sterile microcentrifuge tubes and left in a -80°C freezer in the lab.

### Monday 21st August 2023

Due to logistical issues regarding our orders and lab availability, not much was done in the month prior to our return to the labs. This is why we would recommend starting lab procedures as early as you can; this way, if you happen to encounter any issues, there is ample time to resolve them.

Today we started preparations for Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) procedures on our Toehold Switch sequences. We created falcon tubes with:

25μl GoTaq Master Mix 2x concentrated (using 20-200μl pipette)  
10μl from template DNA (either mCherry or GFP)  
5μl of each primer (FWD and REV)  
5μl of nuclease free water  
This mix is then centrifuged to remove any air bubbles in the mixture and once finished, put through a thermocycler

Whilst this is heated, we created our gel trays for electrophoresis at 1% agarose concentration along with 10μl GelRed nucleic acid. This mix is then microwaved  
Once cooled, the gel is poured into a tray with the comb and left to set

Once this was completed, we conducted electrophoresis on our DNA at 100W for about 1 hour. once finished, we were able to analyse our trays using UV light.

### Tuesday 22nd August

Unfortunately, our DNA had not amplified as expected, so decided to redo the process from Monday with a few adjustments:  
PCR was redone, but at a higher annealing temperature (55°C compared to 52°C on Monday)  
Our gel mix for electrophoresis was made at 2% agarose concentration.

Commit message:

Bio stuff 2 (#123)
* bio stuff 2

* bio stuff 2

* (lint): Run prettier against 4e939c10744d1555d2f70fcf9e76b23510a59577

* Remove escaped spaces

* Update biology-protocols.mdx

* (lint): Run prettier against c33c6a1815845b330ba8e8c5cd70efe0e0ee8487

---------

Co-authored-by: Louis Cahill <l.cahill@cityoflondonschool.org.uk>
Co-authored-by: github-actions[bot] <41898282+github-actions[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: James Cahill <jcahill773@gmail.com>

pages/mdx/biology-lab-work.mdx, after:

---
name: Biology - Lab Work
description: TBD
slug: /biology/lab-work
---

import { navigate } from "gatsby";

## Lab Work

<b>
	In this section, you will find notes from our lab work, which took place over the summer in 2023.
</b>

### Monday 17th July 2023

Today we delivered the equipment to the lab and started the briefing with Dr Markiv at 10am. This included safety briefing about disposal, gloves and coats, as well as some core skills such as pipetting. We found that in ordering the E. coli, they were not competent cells, as we had planned to use, so we would have to accommodate the new protocols to prepare the E. coli for transformations.

During the day, we prepared the solutions needed to create competent bacteria from ours. This included:

20g/L LB broth x2; 500ml water flask  
0.1 M CaCl2 solution (7.35 g of CaCl2·2H2O in 500 ml of H2O) in 500 ml Pyrex bottle.  
0.1 M MgCl2 solution (10.165 g of MgCl2 ·6H2O in 500ml of H2O) in 500ml Pyrex bottle.  
50% glycerol solution (100 ml of glycerol and 100 ml H2O) in 200 ml Pyrex bottle.  
(All these solutions would then be autoclaved and stored at 4°C.)

We also produced stock solutions for our agar plates using:

LB agar 2x 400ml in 500ml Pyrex bottle; 20g/L LB broth (8g) + 2% weight per volume agar (8g) in 400ml water.  
20g/L LB broth, making 200ml  
Ampicillin 100 mg/ml – 1g in 10ml of MilliQ water.  
(These were closed with sponge and foil, labelled and autoclaved at 125°C for 15 minutes and stored at room temperature.)

The stock solution is filtered through a 0.2 mm filter, aliquoted into 10 tips (1μ/ml each) and stored at -20oC until use. The final working concentration of all antibiotics is 1:1000 of the stock solution (1000x ampicillin).  
With these solutions, we created our agar plates and left them to cool and solidify.

Our E. coli cells were also inoculated and left overnight on agar plates to grow in preparation for making them competent. This was done during the week, and we resumed work on Thursday.

### Thursday 20th July 2023

We found that the DNA that we ordered was linear and did not have four random nucleotides on its ends. As a result, the restriction sites were too close to the end which made it difficult for restriction enzymes to “break” the restriction sites. This meant that we would have to use primers to add onto the ends of our sequences and turn our linear DNA into plasmids using a plasmid backbone.

Today, we used a mass spectrometer to measure the growth of our E. Coli, based on its optical density in respect to the density of the media alone (the LB Broth). The spectrometer detects absorbance 600 Nanometres.  
The first measurement was 0.3, so we let the bacteria grow in a shaking incubator for 20 mins
This resulted in the second measurement being 0.585, which is within our working range (0.4-0.6).

Having obtained a good amount of bacteria, we left them on ice for 30 minutes before centrifuging them in the solutions we has prepared on Monday, turning them into competent bacteria. You can find the process for this in our <b><a href="#" onClick={() => navigate("/biology/protocols/")}>Protocols</a></b> section.  
Once prepared, 50μl of the cells were aliquoted into 1.5ml sterile microcentrifuge tubes and left in a -80°C freezer in the lab.

### Monday 21st August 2023

Due to logistical issues regarding our orders and lab availability, not much was done in the month prior to our return to the labs. This is why we would recommend starting lab procedures as early as you can; this way, if you happen to encounter any issues, there is ample time to resolve them.

Today we started preparations for Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) procedures on our Toehold Switch sequences. We created falcon tubes with:

25μl GoTaq Master Mix 2x concentrated (using 20-200μl pipette)  
10μl from template DNA (either mCherry or GFP)  
5μl of each primer (FWD and REV)  
5μl of nuclease free water  
This mix is then centrifuged to remove any air bubbles in the mixture and once finished, put through a thermocycler

Whilst this is heated, we created our gel trays for electrophoresis at 1% agarose concentration along with 10μl GelRed nucleic acid. This mix is then microwaved  
Once cooled, the gel is poured into a tray with the comb and left to set

Once this was completed, we conducted electrophoresis on our DNA at 100W for about 1 hour. Once finished, we were able to analyse our trays using UV light. You can find the full protocol for electrophoresis and PCR in our <b><a href="#" onClick={() => navigate("/biology/protocols/")}>Protocols</a></b> page.

### Tuesday 22nd August

Unfortunately, our DNA had not amplified as expected, so we decided to redo the process from Monday with a few adjustments:  
PCR was redone, but at a higher annealing temperature (55°C compared to 52°C on Monday)  
Our gel mix for electrophoresis was made at 2% agarose concentration.

### Wednesday 23rd August

Today, we decided to redo electrophoresis again since the number of bands that came up on the gel ladder were not consistent with our expectations. In addition, we slightly changed the protocol to help obtain better results:  
We further increased the annealing temperature to 57°C.  
We used a new master mix with our DNA with a different level of ATCG-ase to help with annealing.  
Instead of GelRed, we used blue/orange loading dye.
